  Power invades our social perception by rendering the mechanisms and the people that employ and manipulate them invisible. The Sexual Contract by Carole Pateman discusses the creation of woman as other and distinct from and formalizes the binary between gender, as understanding the difference between nature and order, intellectualism, and barbarism. This binary requires an “other”, a boogeyman, essentially a justification for the system in place to “civilize” the other. This retroactive restructuring of our collective past normalizes colonization as the inevitable, natural outcome of progress. It eases its hostages into a false sense of reality and security. It is the gaslighting impact of racist, hegemonic, capitalist, sexist, and a host of other -isms that augments the reality of those that whether willingly or not engage in this system. 

  While the Sexual Contract doesn’t fully grasp the nuance of how gender identity, race, ability, class, and geography complicate the parameters of the contract, it does provide perspective. One of the most invisible displays of systemic control and power is the relationship between the built environment and access to food systems. Through the violent hijacking and reallocation of land and resources, individuals working on behalf of the colonial entities (1500s) were able to seize control of and manipulate the food systems and literally restructure the global south’s relationship to food. Across the intersections of difference, colonized people lost access to their natural ways of knowing and being and through social “reprogramming” through control of the built environment. However, particularly but not limited to the US, people  found ways to resist systems of oppression and control through reconceptualizing land and space by community built mutual aid networks. 

  One important example of a temporary harbor is “petit marronage”. Petit Marronage is a term that refers to the intentional communities built by escaped enslaved Africans. These were intentional communities that were created to resist enslavement by any means necessary.  Petit marronage specifically refers to the Great Dismal swamp settlement located at the border of North Carolina and Virginia. This site was often revisited through enslavement as a mobile, temporary space for Black, Indigenous and white folks attempting to escaping the ravages of enslavement.  The theme of petit marronage allows us to consider how individuals and communities created sites of resistance though community-driven food systems. 
